Cynicism (contemporary)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search
Attitude characterised by distrust
"Cynical" redirects here. For the classical philosophy, see Cynicism
(philosophy). For other uses, see Cynic.

Cynicism is an attitude characterized by a general distrust of the
motives of "others".^[1] A cynic may have a general lack of faith or
hope in people motivated by ambition, desire, greed, gratification,
materialism, goals, and opinions that a cynic perceives as vain,
unobtainable, or ultimately meaningless and therefore deserving of
ridicule or admonishment. The term originally derives from the ancient
Greek philosophers, the Cynics, who rejected conventional goals of
wealth, power, and honor. They practiced shameless nonconformity with
social norms in religion, manners, housing, dress, or decency, instead
advocating the pursuit of virtue in accordance with a simple and
natural way of life.

By the 19th century, emphasis on the ascetic ideals and the critique of
current civilization based on how it might fall short of an ideal
civilization or negativistic aspects of Cynic philosophy led the modern
understanding of cynicism to mean a disposition of disbelief in the
sincerity or goodness of human motives and actions.^[citation needed]
Modern cynicism is a distrust toward professed ethical and social
values, especially when there are high expectations concerning society,
institutions, and authorities that are unfulfilled. It can manifest
itself as a result of frustration, disillusionment, and distrust
perceived as owing to organizations, authorities, and other aspects of
society.

Cynicism is often confused with pessimism or nihilism, perhaps due to
its distrust in others. The differences between the three is that
cynicism is a distrust by prudence; while due to a sense of defeatism,
pessimism is the distrust of potential success. Nihilism on its part is
the general distrust cast upon the belief that anything in life
(including life itself) has any valuable meaning.
[ ]

Contents

* 1 Overview
* 2 Critical evaluation
* 3 Health effects
* 4 In politics
    + 4.1 Possible effects
* 5 Social cynicism
* 6 See also
* 7 References
* 8 Further reading
* 9 External links

Overview[edit]

Modern cynicism has been defined as an attitude of distrust toward
claimed ethical and social values and a rejection of the need to be
socially involved.^[2] It is pessimistic about the capacity of human
beings to make correct ethical choices, and one antonym is naiveté.^[3]
Modern cynicism is sometimes regarded as a product of mass society,
especially in those circumstances where the individual believes there
is a conflict between society's stated motives and goals and actual
motives and goals.^[4]^[5]

Critical evaluation[edit]

Cynicism can appear more active in depression. In his bestselling
Critique of Cynical Reason (1983), Peter Sloterdijk defined modern
cynics as "borderline melancholics, who can keep their symptoms of
depression under control and yet retain the ability to work, whatever
might happen ... indeed, this is the essential point in modern
cynicism: the ability of its bearers to work—in spite of anything that
might happen."^[6]

One active aspect of cynicism involves the desire to expose hypocrisy
and to point out gaps between ideals and practices.^[7] George Bernard
Shaw allegedly expressed this succinctly: "The power of accurate
observation is commonly called cynicism by those who don't have
it".^[8]

Health effects[edit]

A study^[9] published in Neurology journal in 2014 found an association
between high levels of late-life "cynical distrust" (interpreted and
measured in the study in terms of hostility) and dementia. The survey
included 622 people who were tested for dementia for a period of 8
years. In that period, 46 people were diagnosed with dementia. "Once
researchers adjusted for other factors that could affect dementia risk,
such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol and smoking, people with
high levels of cynical distrust were three times more likely to develop
dementia than people with low levels of cynicism. Of the 164 people
with high levels of cynicism, 14 people developed dementia, compared to
nine of the 212 people with low levels of cynicism."^[10]

Research has also shown that cynicism is related to feelings of
disrespect. According to a study published in the Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General in 2020, "everyday experiences of
disrespect elevated cynical beliefs and vice versa. Moreover, cynical
individuals tended to treat others with disrespect, which in turn
predicted more disrespectful treatment by others."^[11]

In politics[edit]

Globe icon.
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the
United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You
may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create
a new section, as appropriate. (November 2014) (Learn how and when to
remove this template message)

In a 1996 paper, J. N. Cappella and K. H. Jamieson claimed that
"healthy skepticism may have given way to corrosive cynicism".^[12]
Cynicism regarding government or politics can logically lead to
political withdrawal and effective political helplessness. In 2013
conservative politician and political theorist William J. Bennett
warned that America could "crumble from within; that we would become
cynical and withdraw".^[13]

Possible effects[edit]

A 2004 experiment and paper called The Effects of Strategic News on
Political Cynicism, Issue Evaluations, and Policy Support: A Two-Wave
Experiment found that the way the news media presents the news can
cause political cynicism. The experiment also demonstrated "a negative
relation between efficacy and cynicism suggesting that efficacious
citizens were less likely to be cynical about politics". It was found
that straight dry, "issues-based" news did not cause political
cynicism, but that "Strategic News" and "game news" did. The latter two
types of news presentation emphasize:

...the horse race, strategy, and tactics of politics,"..."news
coverage of candidate motivations and personalities, focus on
disagreement between parties, candidates or voters, and the presence
and emphasis on polls in the news," or "positioning the electorate
as spectators and candidates as performers."^[14]

Social cynicism[edit]

Social cynicism results from high expectations concerning society,
institutions and authorities; unfulfilled expectations lead to
disillusionment, which releases feelings of disappointment and
betrayal.^[15]

In organizations, cynicism manifests itself as a general or specific
attitude, characterized by frustration, hopelessness, disillusionment
and distrust in regard to economic or governmental organizations,
managers or other aspects of work.^[16]
